===========================
THE WORLD BEFORE ECONOMICS:
===========================
1) But why are we jabbering about trade here? Because contrary to popular
belief, it is trade that makes the world go round, not money! Money is just
what is used to conduct a trade. See? You learn something new everyday!

2) What about the purpose and function of money? As someone put it
succinctly:
	Money’s a matter of functions four,
	A Medium, a Measure, a Standard, a Store.

3)Things may have proceeded indefinitely in this manner if it hadn’t been
for Europe. In the fourteenth century, a new and exciting energy had begun to
sweep across Europe as it shook off a dull and dreary period of its history,
now called the Dark Ages. The rumble began in Italy, but soon spread across
the continent. People who had blindly followed the rules laid down by priests
and kings and rarely thought about things for themselves began to question
everything. These new ‘rebels’ were curious about all kinds of stuff: How do
things work? Does the Bible really say what the priests say it says? Is there
anything I can build to make my work easier?

4) People began to experiment with art, science, politics, literature,
architecture, music and philosophy. The outpouring of creativity felt like a
revival of the intelligence and energy of mankind itself. The invention of the
printing press in 1440 by German innovator Johannes Gutenberg helped these
revolutionary ideas spread quickly, encouraging more people to think and
build and paint and write. No wonder the period is now called the
Renaissance (‘rebirth’ in French).

5) Kings and queens began thinking out of the box, too. Towards the
middle of the fifteenth century, Henry VII in England and King Ferdinand
and Queen Isabella in Spain emerged as the builders of the first ‘nation
states’—kingdoms where the rulers (and not a random bunch of chieftains)
held all the power, where all the people of the kingdom followed the same set
of rules and laws and paid the same taxes, and where everyone felt they were
part of one big (if not-always-happy) family

6) We are still in the fifteenth century, at a time when spices,especially 
pepper, were worth their weight in gold in Europe (Why? Because when you used
a lot of it, it masked the smell and taste of rotting meat. This was before 
refrigerators were invented, remember! Ugh!).

7) The first to go, in 1492 CE, was
Christopher Columbus of Spain, who sailed forth with the blessings of the
same King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella whom we talked about earlier. He
went west, bumped into two huge continents no one knew existed, and
brought back not spices but strange-looking vegetables that we know today as
tomatoes and potatoes and chillies, and the divine Theobroma cacao, food of
the gods, otherwise known as the cocoa bean, the progenitor of chocolate.

8) In 1497, the Portuguese seaman Vasco da Gama sensibly went south
along the west coast of Africa, did a hairpin bend at the Cape of Good Hope,
and eventually reached Mozambique, where Kutchi sailor (Kutch is a part of
Gujarat today) Kanji Malam is believed to have shown him the way to the
spice garden of the world, i.e., the Malabar coast.

9) As ideas went, Mercantilism was a brilliant one for European rulers and their
cronies—ministers, nobles, landowners, and merchants who traded with
foreign lands—and it made Europe very, very rich.
Obviously, however, it was a terrible idea as far as the colonies (the
poor foreign suckers conquered by Europe) were concerned. Why, even the
non-merchants and non-nobles of Europe were not exactly loving it (refer
Afterthought 3 to see why)

10) Look at all the civilisations that flourished before us
Egypt, Greece, Rome, Mesopotamia, China, India—they didn’t do
business with the world using stupid ideas like these. They freely traded
their stuff for other people’s stuff, and THAT’s how they grew rich, not by
looting and plundering like you guys.

11) Wealth is not static, it can be created! Getting
rich at someone else’s expense is not only immoral, it’s imbecilic! Both
sellers and buyers can become rich if they trade sensibly with each other—
it’s only when everyone benefits that trade even makes sense.

12) By the ninth century, the Chola dynasty, also of Tamil Nadu, had become
the masters not only of most of southern India but parts of southeast Asia.
Chola trade with the Srivijaya Empire of Sumatra and the T’ang dynasty of
China—Chinese junks were a common sight at ports on the Malabar and
Coramandel coasts—was as brisk and profitable as that with the Abbasid
Caliphate of Baghdad. In fact, because of their location in the southern
peninsula between the eastern and western seas, the Cholas helped to
introduce China to the rest of the world as a trading partner.

13) By the time the Mughals came to rule us in the sixteenth century, India was
a flourishing world economy, the second largest in the world. The port of
Surat, much patronised by the Mughals, was renowned across the world for
its exports of silk and diamonds, and considered one of the greatest trading
cities of the world, on par with Venice and Beijing. In the year 1700,
Emperor Aurangazeb reported an annual revenue of £100 million.

14) It all started innocuously enough. 
In Calcutta, British traders of the East India Company (which had its
own well-equipped, well-trained army), helped Mir Jafar, the rebel
commander of Nawab Siraj-ud-daulah of Bengal, win a battle against his
king. We now know this landmark battle as the Battle of Plassey. In return,
the grateful Mir Jafar gave the traders a swathe of land to rule. This had never
happened before—usually, the traders’ reward for helping someone win was
money, or exclusive trading rights in the kingdom, or increased influence
with the new king.

15) Machines were being invented that did all kinds of work
way quicker, more accurately, and more efficiently than individual people
could. The machines were hungry for raw material—cotton, iron, silk, indigo.
And India—large, bountiful India, full of people who could be put to work,
and rich with fertile fields and minerals—became the hand that fed the mouth
of the mechanical beast

16) Suddenly, India, a land of skilled workers which had always exported
expensive finished goods (cloth, jewellery, handicraft) to the world and got
gold and silver in return, was exporting cheap raw material and getting
expensive finished goods in return instead. Her fields were being used to
grow things that could not be eaten—cotton, jute, indigo, opium—instead of
grain to fill her own people’s bellies. Her farmers were forced to pay huge
taxes, often with their own personal store of food grain, even when the
monsoons failed, or they faced severe punishment. Briskly-produced bales
of inexpensive machine-made British cloth pushed more expensive home-
spun khadi out of the market. This happened in other fields, too, with
machine-made products replacing hand-made products, and turning artisans
and craftspeople into beggars. Devastating famines broke out, killing tens of
thousands of people

17) The chap who figured out the answer, some forty years after The Wealth
of Nations was published, was a British economist called David Ricardo. He
said this happens because of choices people and countries make, based on a
concept called opportunity cost. The short definition of opportunity cost is:
‘what you give up to get something else’. In a world full of scarcity, said
Ricardo, where everyone has limited money, limited time, and limited
energy, one has to always give up something to get something.* The good
part is that you can usually choose what you want to give up.

18) Desh may be better at 
producing both cotton and cheese, but maybe there is more money to be
made selling cheese to other countries rather than cloth. Maybe Desh can
become way richer by selling lots and lots of cheese across the world than by
selling some cheese and some cloth. In such a case, Desh would rather put all
its people to work making cheese, and buy cotton from Videsh, even though
Videsh’s cotton costs more than its own. In other words, for Desh, the
opportunity cost of making cotton (all the lovely moolah it is possible to
make by making more cheese) is way higher than the opportunity cost of
buying Videsh’s cotton (a slightly bigger spend on cotton). And for Videsh,
even though it isn’t the cheapest cotton cloth-producing country in the world,
this means a lucrative trade in cotton with Desh. Everyone wins.

19) Why do people who can drive their own cars perfectly well hire a driver?
Obviously because the OC of driving themselves is huge. In their minds, it is
bigger than the OC of spending money on a good driver. (Just as an exercise
to help you understand the OC concept better, list five ‘opportunities’ that
someone gives up when they drive their own car. To start you off, here are
two: the opportunity to take a nap while getting from one place to another,
the opportunity to pass on the responsibility of finding a parking spot to
someone else.)
In a similar vein:
▶ Why do mums (or dads) who cook perfectly well choose to order takeout
on weekends?
▶ Why do doctor/engineer/scientist parents, who can surely coach their own
children in math and science, choose to send them out for tuitions in
these subjects instead?
▶ Why do you choose to wake up early to do homework when you could
have done it just as easily the previous night?

If you think about it, the answers to these apparently ‘non-Economics’
questions are selfish ones, all of them based on an Economics concept called
Opportunity Cost! You can’t escape from Economics!

20) This is the bottomline—everyone wants to ‘win’. Everyone—farmers,
schools, factories, cricket teams, countries—wants to use the resources that
they have at their disposal—money, time, talent, skills, brains, energy,
machines, land—in the best possible way to get the result they want. Because
resources are limited and wants are unlimited (economists call this ‘the
problem of scarcity’), everyone is forced to allocate the resources wisely and
to make tough choices, i.e., give up certain things to get other things that they
want more. Which is what David Ricardo was talking about

21) Who is this ‘everyone’ who is making these choices? Economists divide
‘everyone’ into three main ‘agents’: Households, Firms and Governments
All three are essentially making one key choice: a choice between what
economists call ‘jam today’ and ‘jam tomorrow’.

▶ Let’s talk about individuals, or households, first. As a household, 
you have to make a choice between blowing up a lot of money on something that 
you don’t really need but will bring you a lot of happiness right now (jam today) 
and buying something cheaper and putting the extra money aside for things you might
need in the future (jam tomorrow).

▶ For instance, let’s say Biscuit
Factory A, which has been the market leader so far, is facing competition
from Biscuit Factory B, which is producing more biscuits than A is and
filling up supermarket shelves with them. Now Factory A will have to decide
whether to start spending its money on extra flour, butter and sugar, and work
its existing machines to the maximum (and possibly cause them to break
down quicker), so that they can quickly make a ton more biscuits to compete
with Factory B (i.e., jam today) or to spend money on buying more and better
machines that will, over the next year, help them to produce not only more
biscuits than B but many different types of biscuits, which will help them
beat the competition in the long run (i.e., jam tomorrow)

▶ Policy-makers in different countries have to make similar choices. For
example:
Should they encourage the spending of money on setting up factories that
will make lots of money, but will also almost certainly end up polluting
the land, water and air (in other words, ‘jam today’, since the
environmental problems won’t come back to bother you for a few years
yet); OR
Should they recommend that money be spent on developing ‘clean
technology’, which will ensure that any factory that comes up in the
future will pollute as little as possible, thus making for a better planet
for everyone in ten years’ time (jam tomorrow).

20) That’s something to think about, isn’t it? After all, the government is
in a sort of special position—it can’t go to work like normal people and earn
a salary every month. Sure, a government could own farms where it grows
things (rice, apples, sugarcane) or factories where it manufactures stuff
(toothpaste, paper, cars) and earn money for itself by selling them in the
market. The governments of many countries do earn money this way, but
there’s something inherently unfair about that. Since it is the government that
makes the rules on how to do business in a country, what’s to prevent it from
making rules that would help its own companies? It would be like having the
referee in a football match playing as part of one of the teams. 
That is why several governments don’t own too many factories or
farms, preferring to let the people of their countries compete among
themselves, thus keeping it all fair.

21) 
