===========================
THE WORLD BEFORE ECONOMICS:
===========================
1) But why are we jabbering about trade here? Because contrary to popular
belief, it is trade that makes the world go round, not money! Money is just
what is used to conduct a trade. See? You learn something new everyday!

2) What about the purpose and function of money? As someone put it
succinctly:
	Money’s a matter of functions four,
	A Medium, a Measure, a Standard, a Store.

3)Things may have proceeded indefinitely in this manner if it hadn’t been
for Europe. In the fourteenth century, a new and exciting energy had begun to
sweep across Europe as it shook off a dull and dreary period of its history,
now called the Dark Ages. The rumble began in Italy, but soon spread across
the continent. People who had blindly followed the rules laid down by priests
and kings and rarely thought about things for themselves began to question
everything. These new ‘rebels’ were curious about all kinds of stuff: How do
things work? Does the Bible really say what the priests say it says? Is there
anything I can build to make my work easier?

4) People began to experiment with art, science, politics, literature,
architecture, music and philosophy. The outpouring of creativity felt like a
revival of the intelligence and energy of mankind itself. The invention of the
printing press in 1440 by German innovator Johannes Gutenberg helped these
revolutionary ideas spread quickly, encouraging more people to think and
build and paint and write. No wonder the period is now called the
Renaissance (‘rebirth’ in French).

5) Kings and queens began thinking out of the box, too. Towards the
middle of the fifteenth century, Henry VII in England and King Ferdinand
and Queen Isabella in Spain emerged as the builders of the first ‘nation
states’—kingdoms where the rulers (and not a random bunch of chieftains)
held all the power, where all the people of the kingdom followed the same set
of rules and laws and paid the same taxes, and where everyone felt they were
part of one big (if not-always-happy) family

6) We are still in the fifteenth century, at a time when spices,especially 
pepper, were worth their weight in gold in Europe (Why? Because when you used
a lot of it, it masked the smell and taste of rotting meat. This was before 
refrigerators were invented, remember! Ugh!).

7) The first to go, in 1492 CE, was
Christopher Columbus of Spain, who sailed forth with the blessings of the
same King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella whom we talked about earlier. He
went west, bumped into two huge continents no one knew existed, and
brought back not spices but strange-looking vegetables that we know today as
tomatoes and potatoes and chillies, and the divine Theobroma cacao, food of
the gods, otherwise known as the cocoa bean, the progenitor of chocolate.

8) In 1497, the Portuguese seaman Vasco da Gama sensibly went south
along the west coast of Africa, did a hairpin bend at the Cape of Good Hope,
and eventually reached Mozambique, where Kutchi sailor (Kutch is a part of
Gujarat today) Kanji Malam is believed to have shown him the way to the
spice garden of the world, i.e., the Malabar coast.

9) As ideas went, Mercantilism was a brilliant one for European rulers and their
cronies—ministers, nobles, landowners, and merchants who traded with
foreign lands—and it made Europe very, very rich.
Obviously, however, it was a terrible idea as far as the colonies (the
poor foreign suckers conquered by Europe) were concerned. Why, even the
non-merchants and non-nobles of Europe were not exactly loving it (refer
Afterthought 3 to see why)

10) Look at all the civilisations that flourished before us
Egypt, Greece, Rome, Mesopotamia, China, India—they didn’t do
business with the world using stupid ideas like these. They freely traded
their stuff for other people’s stuff, and THAT’s how they grew rich, not by
looting and plundering like you guys.

11) Wealth is not static, it can be created! Getting
rich at someone else’s expense is not only immoral, it’s imbecilic! Both
sellers and buyers can become rich if they trade sensibly with each other—
it’s only when everyone benefits that trade even makes sense.

12) By the ninth century, the Chola dynasty, also of Tamil Nadu, had become
the masters not only of most of southern India but parts of southeast Asia.
Chola trade with the Srivijaya Empire of Sumatra and the T’ang dynasty of
China—Chinese junks were a common sight at ports on the Malabar and
Coramandel coasts—was as brisk and profitable as that with the Abbasid
Caliphate of Baghdad. In fact, because of their location in the southern
peninsula between the eastern and western seas, the Cholas helped to
introduce China to the rest of the world as a trading partner.

13) By the time the Mughals came to rule us in the sixteenth century, India was
a flourishing world economy, the second largest in the world. The port of
Surat, much patronised by the Mughals, was renowned across the world for
its exports of silk and diamonds, and considered one of the greatest trading
cities of the world, on par with Venice and Beijing. In the year 1700,
Emperor Aurangazeb reported an annual revenue of £100 million.

14) It all started innocuously enough. 
In Calcutta, British traders of the East India Company (which had its
own well-equipped, well-trained army), helped Mir Jafar, the rebel
commander of Nawab Siraj-ud-daulah of Bengal, win a battle against his
king. We now know this landmark battle as the Battle of Plassey. In return,
the grateful Mir Jafar gave the traders a swathe of land to rule. This had never
happened before—usually, the traders’ reward for helping someone win was
money, or exclusive trading rights in the kingdom, or increased influence
with the new king.

15) Machines were being invented that did all kinds of work
way quicker, more accurately, and more efficiently than individual people
could. The machines were hungry for raw material—cotton, iron, silk, indigo.
And India—large, bountiful India, full of people who could be put to work,
and rich with fertile fields and minerals—became the hand that fed the mouth
of the mechanical beast

16) Suddenly, India, a land of skilled workers which had always exported
expensive finished goods (cloth, jewellery, handicraft) to the world and got
gold and silver in return, was exporting cheap raw material and getting
expensive finished goods in return instead. Her fields were being used to
grow things that could not be eaten—cotton, jute, indigo, opium—instead of
grain to fill her own people’s bellies. Her farmers were forced to pay huge
taxes, often with their own personal store of food grain, even when the
monsoons failed, or they faced severe punishment. Briskly-produced bales
of inexpensive machine-made British cloth pushed more expensive home-
spun khadi out of the market. This happened in other fields, too, with
machine-made products replacing hand-made products, and turning artisans
and craftspeople into beggars. Devastating famines broke out, killing tens of
thousands of people

17) The chap who figured out the answer, some forty years after The Wealth
of Nations was published, was a British economist called David Ricardo. He
said this happens because of choices people and countries make, based on a
concept called opportunity cost. The short definition of opportunity cost is:
‘what you give up to get something else’. In a world full of scarcity, said
Ricardo, where everyone has limited money, limited time, and limited
energy, one has to always give up something to get something.* The good
part is that you can usually choose what you want to give up.

18) Desh may be better at 
producing both cotton and cheese, but maybe there is more money to be
made selling cheese to other countries rather than cloth. Maybe Desh can
become way richer by selling lots and lots of cheese across the world than by
selling some cheese and some cloth. In such a case, Desh would rather put all
its people to work making cheese, and buy cotton from Videsh, even though
Videsh’s cotton costs more than its own. In other words, for Desh, the
opportunity cost of making cotton (all the lovely moolah it is possible to
make by making more cheese) is way higher than the opportunity cost of
buying Videsh’s cotton (a slightly bigger spend on cotton). And for Videsh,
even though it isn’t the cheapest cotton cloth-producing country in the world,
this means a lucrative trade in cotton with Desh. Everyone wins.

19) Why do people who can drive their own cars perfectly well hire a driver?
Obviously because the OC of driving themselves is huge. In their minds, it is
bigger than the OC of spending money on a good driver. (Just as an exercise
to help you understand the OC concept better, list five ‘opportunities’ that
someone gives up when they drive their own car. To start you off, here are
two: the opportunity to take a nap while getting from one place to another,
the opportunity to pass on the responsibility of finding a parking spot to
someone else.)
In a similar vein:
▶ Why do mums (or dads) who cook perfectly well choose to order takeout
on weekends?
▶ Why do doctor/engineer/scientist parents, who can surely coach their own
children in math and science, choose to send them out for tuitions in
these subjects instead?
▶ Why do you choose to wake up early to do homework when you could
have done it just as easily the previous night?

If you think about it, the answers to these apparently ‘non-Economics’
questions are selfish ones, all of them based on an Economics concept called
Opportunity Cost! You can’t escape from Economics!

20) This is the bottomline—everyone wants to ‘win’. Everyone—farmers,
schools, factories, cricket teams, countries—wants to use the resources that
they have at their disposal—money, time, talent, skills, brains, energy,
machines, land—in the best possible way to get the result they want. Because
resources are limited and wants are unlimited (economists call this ‘the
problem of scarcity’), everyone is forced to allocate the resources wisely and
to make tough choices, i.e., give up certain things to get other things that they
want more. Which is what David Ricardo was talking about

21) Who is this ‘everyone’ who is making these choices? Economists divide
‘everyone’ into three main ‘agents’: Households, Firms and Governments
All three are essentially making one key choice: a choice between what
economists call ‘jam today’ and ‘jam tomorrow’.

▶ Let’s talk about individuals, or households, first. As a household, 
you have to make a choice between blowing up a lot of money on something that 
you don’t really need but will bring you a lot of happiness right now (jam today) 
and buying something cheaper and putting the extra money aside for things you might
need in the future (jam tomorrow).

▶ For instance, let’s say Biscuit
Factory A, which has been the market leader so far, is facing competition
from Biscuit Factory B, which is producing more biscuits than A is and
filling up supermarket shelves with them. Now Factory A will have to decide
whether to start spending its money on extra flour, butter and sugar, and work
its existing machines to the maximum (and possibly cause them to break
down quicker), so that they can quickly make a ton more biscuits to compete
with Factory B (i.e., jam today) or to spend money on buying more and better
machines that will, over the next year, help them to produce not only more
biscuits than B but many different types of biscuits, which will help them
beat the competition in the long run (i.e., jam tomorrow)

▶ Policy-makers in different countries have to make similar choices. For
example:
Should they encourage the spending of money on setting up factories that
will make lots of money, but will also almost certainly end up polluting
the land, water and air (in other words, ‘jam today’, since the
environmental problems won’t come back to bother you for a few years
yet); OR
Should they recommend that money be spent on developing ‘clean
technology’, which will ensure that any factory that comes up in the
future will pollute as little as possible, thus making for a better planet
for everyone in ten years’ time (jam tomorrow).

20) That’s something to think about, isn’t it? After all, the government is
in a sort of special position—it can’t go to work like normal people and earn
a salary every month. Sure, a government could own farms where it grows
things (rice, apples, sugarcane) or factories where it manufactures stuff
(toothpaste, paper, cars) and earn money for itself by selling them in the
market. The governments of many countries do earn money this way, but
there’s something inherently unfair about that. Since it is the government that
makes the rules on how to do business in a country, what’s to prevent it from
making rules that would help its own companies? It would be like having the
referee in a football match playing as part of one of the teams. 
That is why several governments don’t own too many factories or
farms, preferring to let the people of their countries compete among
themselves, thus keeping it all fair.

21) Since Indian industry was so underdeveloped, the government felt that,
at least for a while, it should be allowed to find its feet and gain confidence
without worrying about competition from foreign industries, which were
more established, more aggressive, and far wealthier.* India had just come
out of a dark period where exactly that kind of competition had destroyed our
industries, so this seemed like a great idea at the time

22) So, in 1991, India finally decided to liberalise, or open up the economy,
and let foreign companies come in and set up shop. Mollycoddled Indian
industries would have to up their game and compete—or die trying. As
expected, many inefficient industries died, but several others got their act
together, and are still around, competing fiercely with the foreign ones and
even expanding beyond Indian shores. With the new freedom to start
companies without too much government interference, thousands of new,
exciting Indian companies with fresh ideas on what the Indian customer
would like also opened their doors

23) In 2016, we celebrated a quarter century of liberalisation. Everyone
agrees it has been a huge success and that it has made life far more
comfortable, interesting and fun for all of us. After all, that’s the reason you
are getting to watch Modern Family and Quantico while snacking on Lay’s
chips and guzzling Pepsi!

24) The other problem with the command economy (and Communism) is
that it doesn’t take into account one important thing about human nature—
the power of incentives. If everyone is going to get the same salary no
matter how hard they work or how smart they are, no one will bother
working hard or being smart at all! But if you offer people incentives
(rewards)—the more kurtas you stitch, the more money you will stand to
make; if you don’t miss a single day at work, you will win an all-expenses
paid trip to the Dubai Shopping Festival—they will work harder, smarter
and more efficiently. That is why most countries have now done away
with Communist governments and command economies and gone over to
democratic governments and a different economic system

25) The meaning of the word ‘inflation’, in Economics, is ‘a general overall
increase in the prices of things’ in a country. Most people say that
‘inflation is caused because governments print more money’, but some
economists say that it is actually the other way around, i.e., ‘governments
print more money because there is inflation’. Either way, for our purposes,
it is enough to know that inflation and ‘more money in the money pool’ go
hand in hand, whichever comes first

26)Now, what are some of the factors (besides governments putting
more money in the money pool) that cause inflation?
▶ I’m the bossman: this is going to cost you. If a producer has no
competition, he has market power. People who want what he is
selling have no choice but to buy it from him. Therefore, this guy can
merrily jack up his prices, causing inflation. That’s what Alphonso,
in our example, did in Year 1. Economists would call our farmer a
monopolist, and his business a monopoly.
▶ Everyone wants it, and is willing to pay the price. If there is a
sudden increase in demand for something which is in short supply,
prices go up, causing inflation (demand-pull inflation). In our
example, people in the village who suddenly found themselves flush
with money all wanted mangoes since it was the season. This was
unexpected, and the supply available could not keep up with the
demand, causing prices to zoom. (This is also what happens to the
price of tickets to an important IPL match, although that is not
entirely unexpected.)
▶ Dude, it cost me to make this thing. If it costs more to produce
something this year than it did last year, then obviously the producer
has to make up the extra money he spent. So the price of the product
goes up (cost-push inflation).

And so, the moral of the story is that, with inflation, just like with
everything else in life, the Goldilocks Principle works best. Not too much,
not too little, but just right

27) P.S. How do we get the data about what things cost across the country? Well, there are
people who actually go around and collect this information, from some 310 towns and
1181 villages! In fact, this is one of the jobs that village postmen and women do, apart
from delivering mail

28) Zimbabwe experienced the hyper-est form of hyperinflation in November
2008, when the rate of inflation was—hold your breath—7.96 BILLION
per cent! That means a loaf of bread which cost, say, 1 Zimbabwean
dollar (ZWD) in the year 2000, cost 7.96 billion ZWD in November 2008!
On 16 January 2009, the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe issued the largest 
denomination ZWD ever— the 100 trillion dollar note! What could it buy? 
Not even the tiniest bar of chocolate!

29) The government asked people to bring all their ZWDs
—in wheelbarrows or trucks or whatever—to the banks and exchange
them for US Dollars (USD). How many ZWDs would people have to give
in to get 1 USD in return? Just 250 trillion.

30) This kind of exchange rate, based on the purchasing power of a currency,
is called purchasing power parity. A country’s GDP calculated using
this method is called that country’s PPP GDP (phew, so many letters!).
Although this kind of calculation is not perfect either, many economists
feel it is a better measure of the strength of a currency than nominal GDP

31) Generally speaking, this is how price elasticity should work. The
demand for essential goods (rice, onions, milk, petrol) are more or less
price inelastic, while the demand for luxury goods (gold jewellery, cars,
houses) and goods which have decent substitutes, are price elastic. If what
you are planning to buy is price elastic, you will either simply postpone
buying it (in case of a luxury good) until prices fall; or you will buy the
cheaper substitute instead (like in our sneakers example).

32) As you can see, none of these three situations—monopoly, oligopoly,
monopsony—is a good thing. To make sure they don’t happen, governments
have all kinds of rules and regulations in place. But governments also have to
be careful—too many rules upset producers, who will then be reluctant to put
their money into manufacturing goods, but too few rules harm consumers.
Yup, it isn’t easy being the government!

33) Remember, though, that they are more likely to support you if it is
convenient to do so and if there is something in it for them. Economists refer
to this ‘something in it for them’ as an incentive. If you want to influence
your customers’ buying behaviour (i.e., make sure they buy your product),
you should give them ‘incentives’.

34) Appeal to customer hearts, not heads. Gently nudge customers to buy
your product over others with posters that evoke nostalgia (‘Your Naani
doesn’t serve her nimbu paani in plastic cups and neither do we!’) or
guilt (A visual of a dustbin full of used paper-plastic cups from fast food
places and roadside coffee tea places, with the line ‘How many trees did
you destroy last week?’) or good old awww (‘Show the planet some
love—drink our lemonade!’).

35) Address your customers’ concerns. Make sure your glasses are
sparkling. Have someone in a clean apron wiping off freshly washed
glasses in the stall, with a clean cloth. Make sure your surfaces and
counters are wiped down regularly. Stand the clean glasses upside down
on cheerful and clean teacloths. Make customers forget their hygiene
argument.

36) Create one killer incentive. Make badges—’I did my bit for Swacch
Bharat today’—and pin them to every customer’s sleeve. Your
customers will love it. Everyone will know how virtuous they’ve been
without them having to say anything. What’s in it for you? Other people
will ask your customers about the badges, and word about your
lemonade will spread.

37) Banks work out of big fancy buildings for a reason!
Here’s an interesting bit of trivia: How come big banks are always located
in the largest, fanciest offices, in the most expensive part of town?
Because they have tons of money, that’s why! Well, yes, but do they
really need those big, fancy buildings? Wouldn’t they rather use the
money they earn somewhere else?
Well, like everyone else, banks use behavioural economics as well.
Like every other vendor in the market, banks are trying to get your
money. But unlike most other vendors, they don’t have a real ‘product’
that you can touch and feel. So what are they actually trying to sell to
you? What do they want you to buy? The product that banks are selling to
you is an idea called ‘trust’. You will only ‘buy’ from them (i.e., give
them your money) if you trust them. You wouldn’t lend money to
someone you didn’t trust, would you?
