-------
Don'ts:
-------
1) Don't Invest in stocks of Government Companies (ie Government's holdings > 50 %).

    Rationale   : Management of such companies doesn't have the enough control to take progressive decisions
                  and ruling parties use these companies for politics. 
    Example     : Indian oil corp (56 % Government holdings in Mar 2018), paid an additional dividend in 
                  FY2019 than usual, because of pressure from government and also took a margin cut as 
                  government reduced petrol prices to gain votes because it was election time back in May 2019.
                  (IOC has lost 40 % from FY2018 to FY2020).

2) Don't Invest in stocks that has derivatives.

    Rationale   : The stocks with derivatives, (ie Futures and Option contracts), are usually largecaps,
                  and potential for growth in largecaps are limited compared to Midcaps or smallcaps, but
                  that does not imply that risk in these stock are lower. Largecaps with derivatives, during 
                  economic recessions and slowdowns, have lost marketcap faster than midcaps or smallcaps, as
                  the when it comes to stocks with derivatives, there are no upper and lower circuit limits.
    Example     : On 21th Sep 2018, DHFL lost 43 % of it's market cap in single trading day.
                  (open: 615.15 High: 615.15 close: 350.55 Low: 274.75)

3) Don't Invest in stocks that are hitting upper or lower circuit limits.

    Rationale   : Trading stops for remainder of the day if a stock hits 20 % (or 10 % or x% as imposed by the exchange) 
                  circuit limit on either side, so it is difficult to enter or exit from such stocks as trading halts. 
                  Usually when a stock hits upper circuit continuously, then when the limit restriction is removed 
                  by the exchange it usually hits the lower circuit faster, so losing months of gains in days.
    Example     : Shares of 7NR Retail Ltd, has been hitting the upper circuit from 11 Nov 2019 till 26 Dec 2019, 
                  after that, the share has lost 20 % in two days (ie 26th on 27th Dec) by hitting the lower circuits
                  on both days.

4) Don't Invest the money you would need in within a year (ie Short term Liability) in stocks (Long Term assets).

    Rationale   : After doing your due diligence, and buying stock, still losses are made because of selling the 
                  stock at wrong time. So if you invest the money that you would need in near term into stocks,
                  when you need it back, it might not be the good time to sell it, as stock price could possibly  
                  go higher where you might miss potential capital gains or even worse it might have undergone 
                  a correction, and if you have held it through and hoping it will recover in near term, 
                  now you would sell it at lower price and have to take a capital loss.
    Example     : If you have bought HDFC AMC back in end of Mar 2019 at Rs 1500, with the capital that
                  you would need the next month, and sold it for Rs 1600 at the end of Apr 2019, you would have
                  made a gin of 6.67 %, but if you have held it till end of Nov 2019, and sold at Rs 3700, then
                  your gain could have been 146.67 % instead of just 6.67 %.

5) Don't Invest in value traps (ie, Low PE and High dividend yield).

    Rationale   : The core of fundamental analysis is to find under valued stocks (these stocks too have 
                  Low PE and High dividend yield). But not all Low PE, high dividend yield stocks are under valued
                  as mostly such stocks are fairly valued by the market. As market puts a premium valuation on stocks 
                  that have good management, high growth prospects, better Return ratios etc. Hence if a stock looks
                  under valued, then take a closer look, check, and double check before you invest in it as market 
                  could be right to value it where it is.
    Example     : LEEL Electricals Ltd, Loyd AC manufacturer, was trading around Rs 20 in Jan 2018, after falling 
                  from Rs 200, the PE was only 1.5x and dividend yield was grater than 10 %. Now if someone have 
                  bought it considering it under valued, the share has further lost greater than 85 % and trading at 
                  Rs 2.5 in Dec 2019, so if held this long, then they would have lost all their investment.


6) Don't try to catch a falling knife, ie, to average down or to buy a stock as its price is falling.
    
    Rationale   : Market lows are only visible in hindsight, ie after the stock stops falling and 
                  reverses it direction and starts rising. Too many smart people have tried and failed to 
                  correctly time the market lows. Usually, rapidly falling stocks fall hard and long before 
                  they recover.
    Example     : Yes bank Share fell 50 % from its all time high to around Rs 160 during Dec 2018. Thinking that 
                  this is an opportunity to buy and if you would have bought it during Dec 2018, and if held it 
                  for a year (Dec 2019), then you would have lost 70 % as share price fell below Rs 50 . 
                  But it is interesting to note that before falling 70 %, the stock actually rose 50 % (Rs 250) 
                  in Apr 2019, I guess a lot people in market believed that the stock was under valued at that time.

7) Don't Sell, unless it is time to sell.
    
    Rationale   : After doing your due diligence, if have bought a growth stock, and if the price 
                  increases fast, you would think that the stock is over valued because of this 
                  surge in price, but when market starts to price a stock correctly, it takes the  
                  price to new heights before under going any correction, so if you had sold it early, 
                  then you would have missed the ride but this rule is the most difficult one to follow,  
                  and takes a lot of experience to master.
    Example     : If you would have bought Adani Green Energy's Share in Aug 2019 for Rs 45 and 
                  See it rise over 100 % to over Rs 90 within Oct 2019 and sold it, you would have
                  missed the ride where the share price has raised another 60 % from Rs 95 to Rs 150 
                  in the next one month.
                  
8) Don't Invest in Companies that cannot retain their employees.
   
   Rationale   : If a company fails to retain its Key executives and employees like, its CEO, CFO, Company Secretary, CTO etc,
                 then, the company cannot sustain growth. As new employees will take their time to reach similar expericence
                 and productivity levels growth tends to slow down. This may also indicate the lack of cooperation and synergy 
                 in the company.
   Example     : Urja Global, a penny stock, has failed to retain its CEOs and CFOs even for short period. The share
                 has lost 80% from recent high, after making 600+ % gain in FY 2019.

9) Don't Invest in a company whose parent group or siblings are not performing well.
    
    Rationale   : Just like a family, the performing company of group will endup covering the debts of the non performing 
                  ones and hence its growth will slow down untill the entire family of companies perform well. There may be 
                  a few exception to this rule, but this generally holds true.
    Example     : The shares Zee Entertainment Enterprise Ltd (ZEEL), part of Essel group, largest media company in india, In 
                  FY 2019 fell by 50 %, after promoters of Essel group pledged and sold ZEEL shares to cover the debts 
                  accumulated by infrastructure and real estate arms.  

10) Don't Invest in companies that are run by second or future generation entrepreneurs.
    
    Rationale   : Successors of first generation enterpreneurs, generaly lack the drive, the fire, that a first generation
                  enterpreneur has, which is fundamental for the growth of a company and a company lacking in grwoth potential 
                  is not worth investing. And if the company is jointly run by more than one future generation enterpreneurs,
                  it is even more likely to underperform as 'Pride' and 'Ego' is likely to fuel decision making than 'Reason' 
                  and 'Heart'.
    
    Example     : After Dhirubhai Ambani, the Reliance conglomerate was split between the two Ambani brothers, Mukesh and
                  Anil, and Mukesh Ambani's Reliance Industries (RIL, as of Jan 2020) has grown to become the largest company 
                  in india but Anil Ambani's listed enterprises (Rcom, Rinfra, Rcapital etc) has lost more than 90% of their
                  value and deeply in debt.
                  DHFL run by the 'Wadhawan' brothers after 'Rejesh Wadhawan' lost more than 95 % its market cap in FY 2019
                  is another example.
                  
11) Don't Invest in companies that doesn't feel right.
    
    Rationale   : When an Investment doesn't feel right, holding it for long time becomes difficult, moreover it affects your
                  (investor) ability to take good decisions, as it is time tested fact that major losses are made in stock market 
                  or business due to bad decisions, so if an investment doesn't inspire confidence, just doesn't feel right, then it
                  is better to pass it of.
                  
    Example     : Investing in companies which makes products that are negatively impacting the society, maybe a sound financial 
                  decision but it will not feel right.
----
Dos:
----
1) Make sure you do your due diligence before investing and don't do any of the above don'ts.
